---
title: America on the World Stage
date: '2011-06-10T18:30:26'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 24831
---

*America on the World Stage* will be implemented by five public school divisions in central Virginia, four of which have not met Adequate Yearly Progress goals. These districts serve an increasingly diverse population of learners in rural and urban areas, including many students whose first language is not English. The professional development design for the program offers several levels of participation to meet varying needs among teachers. The design features two 8-week instructional modules (Grades 5-12) and one 4-week module (Grades K-4) during the school year. Each module will incorporate hands-on history labs, curriculum analysis, refinement and publication of history lessons, and delivery of in-service training by participants. During a weeklong summer field excursion, 12 teachers will digitally document historical site visits. The program will serve up to 180 teacher participants over the life of the grant, including a cohort of 30 pre-identified teacher scholars who will receive special training and work independently to create digital supplements to specified history textbooks. Preservice teachers from the University of Virginia will join the teacher scholar cohort each spring. The framing lens for the program will be the Organization of American Historians America on the World Stage: A Global Approach to U.S. History, which will explore global and international perspectives on the American history narrative. Teachers will learn about inquiry-based instructional strategies for developing literacy and historical inquiry skills. In addition, they will learn to incorporate multimedia tools and resources into the curriculum. *America on the World Stage* will create an online professional network and library of academic and instructional materials created by participants.