---
title: An Integrated Approach to Teaching American History
date: '2008-02-22T14:13:37'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 18549
---

The project offers professional development in American history to teachers of social studies or U.S. history in grades 4, 5, 7, 8, and 11. Participants are organized into four, grade-specific cohorts (grades 4 and 7; grade 5; grade 8; and grade 11). The cohorts are aligned with the Texas-mandated U.S. history curriculum-grade 4 is taught the history of Texas from early beginnings; grade 5, colonial times through the 20th century; grade 7, history of Texas from early times to the present; grade 8, U.S. history from exploration to reconstruction; and grade 11, U.S. history since reconstruction. The project offers four 3-day, integrated summer colloquia; each summer the Institutes on the Founding Documents conducts a 5-day training session under the auspices of the State Bar of Texas, the Hatton Sumners Foundation, and Law Focused Education, Inc. During the school year, as an extension of the summer colloquia, KAU days provide integrated in-depth follow-up professional development. The American History Content Enrichment Lecture Series of four lectures is held each year. Following the lecture series, 20 veteran U.S. history or social studies teachers' team with 20 beginning teachers of the same grade level for approximately a half day of mentoring. Share Fair is a daylong activity to demonstrate exemplary history teaching strategies; it occurs in the spring of the second and third years of the project. Project Website provides two teachers each year an opportunity to learn how to develop and maintain the website. This project involves collaboration of nine partners: Corpus Christi Museum of Science and History, Del Mar College, Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi, Mary and Jeff Bell Library at Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi, Texas A&M University-Kingsville, State Bar of Texas, and USS Lexington Museum.