---
title: Asbury Park School District
date: '2009-02-10T13:34:05'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 21653
---

The Asbury Park School District has been designated as a New Jersey Enterprise Zone and a Medically Underserved Area. As with many underserved urban districts, the majority of district teachers have had one or fewer courses in American history as part of their undergraduate programs, and many have not received professional development in history for many years. There are also a high number of new, less experienced teachers in the district. To address these challenges, the project will provide a sustained, intensive professional development program that will improve teachers' content knowledge as well as provide resources in best teaching practices. All activities will focus on historical thinking skills. Each year, the Fellows will participate in two 2-day colloquia, a 5-day summer institute, and a field study. Teachers will connect the historical content learned with classroom teaching through the preparation of a content-based portfolio and journal consisting of photographs, videos, artifacts, and writings. The historical topics of early America will include common law and natural law, English antecedent documents, American Indian history, and African slavery. For the second year, teachers will study the French and Indian War, the Revolution, the Constitution, and the Federalist Papers. In Year 3, planned topics are the antebellum period, the Civil War, and Reconstruction. Each year of the project includes a field experience related to the historical era studied, including trips to Waterloo Lenape Indian Village in New Jersey, the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia, and the Civil War Institute at Gettysburg.