---
title: 'Causes of Conflict: Digging Deep to Understand American History'
date: '2009-02-10T13:34:23'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 21700
---

Causes of Conflict will provide teachers a range of program activities designed to deepen their knowledge of traditional American history content as well as the historical thinking skills and attitudes that distinguish it as a separate discipline. Teachers will attend History on Location institutes, led by the Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History, which pair teachers with preeminent historians and experts in classroom pedagogy. The Center for Columbia River History will conduct regional workshops, which will analyze the local application of national themes at nearby sites classes can visit. Seminars with Scholars will be open to a larger audience and will focus on the legal, economic, and social dimensions of the conflicts to be studied. Historical literacy workshops will utilize a Lesson Study approach to implement disciplinary skills, attitudes, and assessments. In Year 1, high school teachers will study the Civil Rights Movement; in Year 2, middle school teachers will examine the Civil War; and in Year 3, fifth grade teachers will analyze the Revolution. Teachers will examine content through distinct lenses: the role of laws (the law, legal arguments, and the courts); the role of peoples (individuals, social groups, and movements); the role of economics (systems, trade, and census data); and the role of place (how national conflicts differ by locale and how a passion for history emerges from a personal connection with historic sites). Specific content includes Martin Luther King, Jr., Brown v. Board of Education, Abraham Lincoln, the Underground Railroad, and the Revolutionary War.