---
title: Creating Vertical Teams in U.S. History
date: '2009-02-10T13:34:17'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 21690
---

San Antonio Independent School District (SAISD) has a culturally diverse student population of mainly Hispanic and African-American students with 93% receiving free or reduced-price meals. In order to positively impact the academic achievement of SAISD students in regular, Pre-AP U.S. history, and AP U. S. history, teachers will study the people, ideas, events, and turning points that contributed to the development of the American experience. It will increase teachers' knowledge of how to teach writing at a higher level using document-based questions in American history, as per the College Board requirements. This project will establish a vertical team of teachers in middle and high school to collaborate on strategies to improve teaching instruction and academic achievement in traditional American History across grade levels. During each year, teachers will read narrative history; analyze primary sources; meet academic historians, master classroom history teachers, and specialists in history education; conduct research; visit historic sites; practice history's "Habits of the Mind;" and learn how to use exemplary teaching techniques. This project will improve the content knowledge of teachers of traditional American history courses in the SAISD as measured by a pre and post-test on the AP US History College level test. The project will also improve academic achievement in U.S. history as measured by the Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills (TAKS) in Grades 8 and 11. Course content will include the Mayflower Compact, the House of Burgesses, the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, the Proclamation of 1763, the Declaration of Independence, Andrew Jackson, the Mexican-American War, the Compromise of 1850, the Lincoln-Douglas Debates (1858), the Civil War, World Wars I and II, the Marshall Plan, and the Vietnam War, among other topics.