---
title: Elementary Southern Mississippi American History Teachers (eSMART)
date: '2009-02-10T13:34:03'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 21645
---

Simpson County School District and 27 other districts near the Gulf Coast in partnership with the Southern Regional Educational Service Agency comprise the South Central Mississippi Consortium for Educational Excellence and Development (SCMCEED). The consortium includes 13 schools "in Need of Improvement." Twenty-five of the 28 districts serve at least one school that did not make Adequate Yearly Progress in 2006-2007. Districts that are members of SCMCEED face unique challenges when it comes to teacher professional development. They serve a very rural, very poor area of the country still reeling in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. No one district is large enough to mount a major professional development effort focused on American history, and the sheer size of the consortium makes a traditional partnership effort unworkable. The proposed project will overcome these challenges. A single cohort of 30 SCMCEED elementary teachers will participate in all eSMART activities (the treatment group). A second cohort of 15-20 teachers will participated in no project activities (the comparison group). The main three of objectives of the eSMART Project is to raise student achievement as measured by an assessment comprised of items from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) online question bank, increase teachers' knowledge of American history as measured by an assessment of content knowledge made up of nationally validated test items, and increase teachers' use of the history teaching "best practices" as measured by peer-rating, portfolio assessments, and observations. Course content will include the following: Beginnings to 1607; colonization, settlement, and communities (1607-1673); the Revolution & the new nation (1763-1815); expansion and reform (1801-1861); the Civil War and Reconstruction (1850-1877); the development of modern America (1865 to 1920); modern America & the World Wars (1914-1945); and contemporary America (1945-present).