---
title: Five Star Liberty Fellowship
date: '2011-06-09T22:35:48'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 24811
---

Four districts in southeastern Ohio make up the *Five Star Liberty Fellowship* (*Fellowship*) consortium, which has 29 schools in need of improvement, 66 percent of students in Grades 3-10 below proficiency in social studies, and only 22 percent of history teachers certified to teach United States history. Activities that support history professional development will provide interactions with scholars and specialists in settings that include colloquia, research studies, summer institutes, classroom coaching, mentoring, and field studies. Other activities for fellows will also welcome non-participants: these include videoconferences, online professional development and Web-based resources, and electronic discussions. The core group of 35 participants will represent the schools and teachers most in need of support. Five veteran teachers will participate and receive intensive training to become teacher-leaders and content specialists to support participants and other consortium history teachers beginning in Year 2. The project is committed to developing strong history teaching across the consortium by employing a turnkey replication model, by which every participant works in a vertical team and becomes a content specialist for his or her home district. *Fellowship* participants will learn by employing a variety of history instructional strategies, including Binary Paideia, content analysis, and a 12-step process for conducting research and creating historical narratives and lessons. Face-to-face and online professional development and participation in field studies at historical sites will help teachers earn master’s degree credits. *Fellowship* narratives, resource materials, virtual field trips and lesson plans will be published on the project Web site, and teachers who complete the training will go on to train other American history teachers.