---
title: Great Lake, Great Nation, Great Stories
date: '2009-02-10T13:34:23'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 21701
---

Great Lake, Great Nation, Great Stories will provide sustained history content and professional development for 30 Grades 4-12 teachers from 24 northern Wisconsin school districts. The majority of the teachers come from small, remote, rural schools with multiple preparations each day and few opportunities to network or engage in dialogue with peers or historians. Project goals include (1) advancing teachers knowledge of history, (2) improving teacher's pedagogical understanding of American history content, (3) increasing student knowledge of American history content, and (4) developing a history education network of regional teachers and historians. Some of the expected outcomes are (1) teacher-developed history units and learning trunks of materials to support history content available to share with other teachers through the CESA #9/12 Instructional Media Center; (2) improved student understanding; (3) improved participation in National History Day; (4) some teachers earning National Board Certification in Social Studies/History; and (5) teachers sharing content and new teaching strategies with other teachers of other disciplines within their home school. At the heart of this project's design are one-week residential colloquia with content delivered by national and regional historians, master teachers, and National History Day staff. One and two-day fall and spring retreats and ongoing online model sharing will sustain the network through the school year. Content will rely on primary documents and will range from the French Voyageurs to the Cold War spies. Other content that will be covered includes the French and Indian War, the Treaty of Paris of 1763, the Revolutionary War, Jacksonian democracy, the Antebellum period, the Civil War, the Spanish-American War, World War I, World War II, and the Cold War.