---
title: Mary Ludwig Hays MaCauley Liberty Fellowship
date: '2009-02-10T13:34:05'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 21654
---

The districts served by this project face educational as well as economic challenges, with five of the six districts classified as "In Need of Improvement" according to the No Child Left Behind Act and one of the districts classified as an Abbot Cistrict by the state. In addition, 23% of district teachers have neither a major nor a minor in American history, and 69% did not receive any professional development in history during the last academic year. To remedy this situation, the project will provide a sustained, intensive professional development program that will improve teachers' content knowledge as well as provide resources in best teaching practices. All activities will focus on historical thinking skills. Each year, the Fellows will participate in two 2-day colloquia, a 5-day summer institute, and a field study. Teachers will connect the historical content learned with classroom teaching through the preparation of a content-based portfolio and journal consisting of photographs, videos, artifacts, and writings. The historical topics of early America will include common law and natural law, English antecedent documents, American Indian history, and African slavery. For the second year, teachers will study the French and Indian War, the Revolution, the Constitution, and the Federalist Papers. In Year 3, planned topics are the antebellum period, the Civil War, and Reconstruction. Each year of the project includes a field experience related to the historical era studied, including trips to Waterloo Lenape Indian Village in New Jersey, the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia, and the Civil War Institute at Gettysburg.