---
title: Northwest Suburban American History Consortium (NSAHC)
date: '2009-02-10T13:33:54'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 21618
---

The Northwest Suburban American History Consortium consists of eleven high schools in the north suburbs of Chicago. The Consortium was created to improve access to high-quality instruction for students who hail from a broad range of socio-economic and racial/ethnic backgrounds. The schools have seen growth in their minority enrollment in the last decade, and the proportion of students eligible for free and reduced-price lunches continues to increase exponentially. A survey of the teachers who currently teach American history indicates that the vast majority of our teachers do not have the strong content preparation and continuing pedagogical support necessary to most effectively teach the class. Many of our teachers are new to the profession, averaging only 7.5 years experience teaching American history. Almost half have had no professional development opportunities in the content area. The Northwest Suburban American History Consortium (NSAHC) has designed a comprehensive program to meet the needs of various teachers while providing a mechanism for widespread dissemination of their work. This program combines various opportunities for teachers to deepen their personal content knowledge with multiple models of dissemination designed to widen the impact of the program to as many teachers, and consequently students, as possible. The program's main structure rests upon a series of graduate courses taught by university professors coupled with summer colloquia coordinated by the National Council for History Education and immersion seminars at local sites of historical significance. Course content will explore the American Revolution and Constitution, the Civil War, the Industrial Revolution, social and political reforms, World Wars I and II, the Cold War, the Civil Rights Movements, feminist and conservative movements, the New Deal, post-1965 immigration, and U.S. women's history, among others.