---
title: 'One Nation: Many Faiths—How Ideas of Religious Liberty Shaped America'
date: '2011-06-06T17:34:09'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 24740
---

*One Nation: Many Faiths* is being implemented in California through County Offices of Education in San Joaquin, Orange, and San Bernardino counties. These areas serve religiously and ethnically diverse populations and include 155 low-performing schools. Selected teachers with one to five years of experience who work in these schools will participate in two week-long summer institutes that incorporate content and pedagogy sessions, attend four face-to-face and online follow-up sessions during the school year, engage in electronic meetings and online networking, implement four lessons from We the People, develop lessons, write in reflective journals, and present at a symposium. The program will serve three cohorts of 25 to 35 teachers, and each cohort will participate in all activities for 18 months. These teachers will, in turn, present what they learn to colleagues at their schools and become part of an established network of teacher leaders through the California Three Rs Project. The thematic focus will be on the foundations and evolution of freedom of conscience in America and the role of religion in the social and political history of the United States. Teachers will learn about research-based instructional strategies for improving students' engagement, comprehension, and critical thinking. These strategies include simulations, debates, open-ended discussion, document-based writing, content reading, strategies for dealing with controversial issues, and sheltered instructional techniques that provide scaffolding for English Language Learners. A program Web site will house examples of appropriate content and effective pedagogy as well as teacher-developed lesson materials.