---
title: The Story of American Freedom
date: '2009-02-10T13:33:42'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 21592
---

The Story of American Freedom will improve student achievement by facilitating a powerful and exciting new focus on primary source documents and technology in the classroom. The program addresses four specific professional development needs: expanding teacher content knowledge in history; revising district curriculum to align to state standards and reflect current disciplinary research; developing teachers' skills in content-based literacy strategies, and integrating technology into the curriculum to bring traditional historical content to underserved student populations. Teachers will develop their ability to think historically and, therefore, will be prepared to create a curriculum that allows students to model the work of historians by analyzing the important historical documents of America's past. Through the collaboration of middle and high school teacher-leaders, a vertically integrated curriculum will be developed to support high-need students' opportunities to access and understand the history of our nation. The project will include a series of intensive teacher training institutes, follow-up activities, curriculum workshops, and field trips to museums, archives, and historical sites. The program will be based on the work of historian Eric Foner, using his book The Story of American Freedom as a framing device. Topics include the American Revolution, the Constitution and Bill of Rights, women and slaves in the early Republic, abolition and emancipation, immigrants and American liberty, the World Wars, and civil rights and voting rights. Field trips will include visits to sites throughout Philadelphia and New York City.