---
title: The Abigail Adams Historical Literacy Fellowship
date: '2009-02-10T13:34:04'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 21650
---

The districts served by the consortium include high-poverty districts with large numbers of Title I schools. Recently, the districts have had a large influx of Hispanic families, which has greatly increased the districts' enrollment of English language learners. Additionally, 92% of district teachers do not hold a major or a minor in American history. To remedy this situation, the project will provide a sustained, intensive professional development program that will improve teachers' content knowledge as well as provide resources in best teaching practices. All activities will focus on historical thinking skills. Additionally, to serve the needs of the teachers' younger students, the project will include the explicit teaching of literacy skills to incorporate effective reading instruction into the American history content. Each year, the Fellows will participate in colloquia, a summer institute, and a field study. Teachers will connect the historical content learned with classroom teaching through the preparation of a content-based portfolio and journal. The historical topics of early America will include common law and natural law, English antecedent documents, American Indian history, and African slavery. For the second year, teachers will study the French and Indian War, the Revolution, the Constitution, and the Federalist Papers. In Year 3, planned topics are the antebellum period, the Civil War, and Reconstruction. Each year of the project includes a field experience related to the historical era studied, including trips to Waterloo Lenape Indian Village in New Jersey, the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia, and the Civil War Institute at Gettysburg.