---
title: Tri-State Liberty Fellowship
date: '2011-06-15T14:11:10'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 24905
---

In these Mississippi, Alabama, and Tennessee districts, only seven percent of professional development opportunities specifically address U.S. history. The project will implement a four-tiered approach: (1) an American history professional development fellowship, (2) a teacher training program for online professional development, (3) a monthly online program for historical content and strategies, and (4) a bimonthly book reading and discussion group. Each year, a cohort of 30 teachers will participate in the equivalent of 16 days of professional development, including a 2-week summer institute that features seven days of content and pedagogy instruction, three days of curriculum development, two Saturday institutes during the school year, a 2-day field study trip to visit local partners, and four half-days of research and review. The project will serve three cohorts of 30 teachers: elementary level in Years 1 and 2, middle school in Years 2 and 3, and high school in Years 4 and 5. The teachers will research and study the political, economic, legal, social and ideological contrasts found throughout American history; they will then create historical narratives, lessons and innovative activities that will be implemented in their classrooms, evaluated and submitted for peer review. The teachers will investigate specific events, primary sources, personalities, turning points, contemporary interpretations and historiographies pertaining to each topic. In particular, they will research and study the significance of U.S. presidents. A wiki will include relevant information not typically found in textbooks or online. Project materials will be made available via a Web portal.