---
title: Walt Whitman Historical Literacy Fellowship
date: '2009-02-10T13:34:04'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
content_type: tah_grant
draft: false
drupal_nid: 21649
---

The partner school districts represent a consortium of three urban districts with high minority populations and a poverty rate of 65%. Both Trenton and Plainfield are state-designated Abbott Districts. In addition, the majority of district teachers have insufficient history content and pedagogical training and very little or no professional development in American history. To address these deficiencies, the project will provide a sustained, intensive professional development program that will improve teachers' content knowledge as well as provide resources in best teaching practices. All activities will focus on historical thinking skills. Additionally, to serve the needs of the teachers' younger students, the project will include the explicit teaching of literacy skills to incorporate effective reading instruction into the American history content. Each year, the Fellows will participate in colloquia, a summer institute, and a field study. Teachers will connect the historical content learned with classroom teaching through the preparation of a content-based portfolio and journal. The historical topics of early America will include common law and natural law, English antecedent documents, American Indian history, and African slavery. For the second year, teachers will study the French and Indian War, the Revolution, the Constitution, and the Federalist Papers. In Year 3, planned topics are the antebellum period, the Civil War, and Reconstruction. Each year of the project includes a field experience related to the historical era studied, including trips to Waterloo Lenape Indian Village in New Jersey, the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia, and the Civil War Institute at Gettysburg.