---
title: Quiz Rules
date: '2010-02-15T11:53:45'
lastmod: '2011-06-16T09:01:44'
content_type: page
draft: false
drupal_nid: 23855
---

### Teachinghistory.org “History Quiz” Official Rules

#### Program Description

No purchase or payment of any kind is necessary to win Teachinghistory.org “History Quiz” (the “Quiz”). A purchase or payment will not increase your chances of winning. Your participation in the Quiz is subject to all federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and ordinances. Void outside the 50 United States and the District of Columbia, and where prohibited by law. Quiz is sponsored by Teachinghistory.org (“Sponsor”).

Quiz begins weekly at 1:00:00 AM Eastern Time each Monday and ends at 12:59:59 AM Eastern Time the following Monday. All submissions with all correct answers will be entered into a random drawing for a Teachinghistory.org prize. In the event that there are no entries with all correct answers, the entry with the most correct answers or a drawing from the entries of most correct answers will occur. Non-winning entries from any drawing will not be carried over into subsequent prize drawings.

The winner will be notified by email. Upon receipt of the winner’s mailing address, the prize will be mailed to the winner. There will be approximately one quiz per week, with one drawing per quiz, and one prize per drawing. The quiz will be suspended during extended holidays such as summer and winter break. Notice will be posted on the Teachinghistory.org to this effect when there is no active quiz.

#### Eligibility

The Quiz is open only to entrants who are residents of the 50 United States (including the District of Columbia) who are the age of majority in their state of residence at the time of entry. Employees, officers, and directors of Teachinghistory.org and partnering organizations as well as members of their immediate families (spouses, parents, siblings, and children, regardless of where they live) and those living in the same household are not eligible to enter or win. All entrants must have access to the Internet prior to the start of the Quiz. Sponsor reserves the right to verify the eligibility of winners. Participation constitutes entrant’s full and unconditional agreement to these Official Rules and to Sponsor’s decisions, which are final and binding in all matters related to the Quiz.

#### To Enter

Visit http://teachinghistory.org each week between 1:00:00 AM ET on Monday and 12:59:59 AM ET the following Monday and submit the online Quiz with your name and email address. You must complete all required information to be eligible to enter. Entries must be submitted by the participant. Use of automated entries or programs or entries submitted by third parties is prohibited and will be disqualified. Limit (1) entry per person/email address per week. Any attempt by any participant to obtain more than the permitted number of entries by using multiple and/or different identities, forms, registrations, addresses, or any other method will void all of that participant’s entries and that participant may be disqualified at Sponsor’s discretion. Multiple participants are not permitted to share the same email address. All entries become the property of Sponsor when submitted and will not be returned to entrant. Normal Internet and usage charges imposed by your online service may apply. Incomplete, illegible, corrupted, or untimely entries are void and will be disqualified. Sponsor and its agencies are not responsible for late, lost, incomplete, damaged, stolen, misdirected, or illegible entries; lost, interrupted, or unavailable network, server, or other connections; or miscommunications, computer or software malfunctions, technical failures, garbled transmissions, damage to a user’s computer equipment (software or hardware), or other errors or malfunctions of any kind whether human, mechanical, electronic, or otherwise. Proof of sending or submission will not be deemed to be proof of receipt by Sponsor. In the event of a dispute as to the identity of an entrant, the authorized account holder of the email address used to enter will be deemed to be the entrant or participant. The “authorized account holder” is the natural person assigned an email address by an Internet access provider, online service provider, Internet service provider, or other organization (which may include an employer) responsible for assigning email addresses for the domain associated with the submitted address. Potential winners may be required to show proof of being the authorized account holder. Entries specifying an invalid, non-working, or inactive email address will be disqualified and ineligible to win.

#### Selection of Winners

On or about Monday of each week, Sponsor will select the name of the potential winner of the weekly prize from the previous week’s Quiz in a random drawing from among all entries received with correct answers. The odds of winning are based on the number of eligible entries received. Winners will be notified by email on or about each Monday. If a potential winner does not respond within seven (7) days after the first attempt to contact him/her, or if the prize notification is returned as undeliverable, that potential winner will be deemed to have forfeited the prize, and Sponsor will select an alternate potential winner in his/her place at random from all eligible entries received. An alternate potential winner must satisfy all eligibility requirements. Winning a prize is contingent upon fulfilling all requirements set forth herein.

Potential winners are subject to verification by Sponsor, whose decisions are final and binding in all matters related to the sweepstakes. An entrant is not a winner of any prize unless and until entrant’s eligibility has been verified and entrant has been notified that verification is complete.

#### Prizes

One (1) prize will be awarded each week. Prizes will vary, but may include (1) Teachinghistory.org flash drive or (1) Teachinghistory.org tote bag. Approximate retail value of each prize: $10.

#### Prize Restrictions

Any and all applicable federal, state, and local taxes are the sole responsibility of the individual prize winner. Prize cannot be substituted, assigned, transferred, or redeemed for cash; however, Sponsor reserves the right to make equivalent prize substitutions at its sole discretion. Sponsor will not replace any lost or stolen prizes.

#### General Conditions

This Quiz is governed by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Void where prohibited by law and outside the United States. Warning: Any attempt by an entrant or any other individual to deliberately damage any website associated with this Quiz or to undermine the legitimate operation of the sweepstakes may be a violation of criminal and civil law, and, should such an attempt be made, the National History Education Clearinghouse reserves the right to prosecute and seek damages from any such person to the fullest extent permitted by law. Sponsor’s failure to enforce any term of these Official Rules shall not constitute a waiver of that provision. Neither Sponsor nor anyone acting on its behalf will enter into any communications with any entrant regarding this Quiz, except as expressly set forth in these Official Rules. Sponsor reserves the right at its sole discretion to disqualify any individual it finds to be attempting to tamper with or undermine the entry process, the website, and/or the legitimate operation of the Quiz; to violate the Official Rules; or to act in an unsportsmanlike or disruptive manner or with the intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass any other person. Sponsor and its agents are not responsible for (1) any incorrect or inaccurate information, whether caused by entrants, printing errors, or by any of the equipment or programming associated with or utilized in the Quiz; (2) technical failures of any kind, including, but not limited to malfunctions, interruptions, or disconnections in phone lines or network hardware or software; (3) unauthorized human intervention in any part of the entry process of the Quiz; (4) technical or human error which may occur in the administration of the Quiz or the processing of entries; or (5) any injury or damage to persons or property which may be caused, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, from entrant’s participation in the Quiz or receipt or use or misuse of any prize. If for any reason an entry is confirmed to have been erroneously deleted, lost, or otherwise destroyed or corrupted, entrant’s sole remedy is another entry in the Quiz, provided that if it is not possible to award another entry due to discontinuance of the Sweepstakes, or any part of it, for any reason, Sponsor, at its discretion, may elect to hold a random drawing from among all eligible entries received up to the date of discontinuance for any or all of the prizes offered herein. If, for any reason, the Quiz is not capable of running as planned, including infection by computer virus or bugs, tampering, unauthorized intervention, fraud, technical failures, or any other causes beyond the control of Sponsor, which corrupt or affect the operation, administration, security, fairness, integrity, or proper conduct of this Quiz, Sponsor may, in its sole discretion, void any suspect entries and (a) cancel or terminate the Quiz (or any portion thereof); (b) modify the Quiz or suspend the Quiz to address the impairment and then resume the Quiz in a manner that best conforms to the spirit of these Official Rules; or (c) award the prize at random from among the eligible, non-suspect entries received up to the time of the impairment.

#### Release and Limitations of Liability

By participating in this quiz, entrants agree that Teachinghistory.org, U.S. Department of Education, Center for History and New Media at George Mason University, the Commonwealth of Virginia, and Stanford University, and their respective affiliates (together, the “released entities”) will have no liability whatsoever for, and shall be held harmless by entrants against, any liability for any injuries, losses, or damages of any kind to persons, including personal injury or death, or property resulting in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, from acceptance, possession, misuse, or use of the prize, entry, or participation in rights, defamation or invasion of privacy, or merchandise delivery. The released entities are not responsible if any prize cannot be awarded due to acts of God, acts of war, natural disasters, weather, or terrorism. By participating in this quiz, participants agree that the released entities will not be responsible or liable for any injuries, damages, or losses of any kind, including direct, indirect, incidental, consequential, or punitive damages to persons, including death, or to property arising out of access to and use of internet site http://teachinghistory.org or the downloading from and/or printing material downloaded from said site.

Without limiting the foregoing, everything regarding this quiz, including the website and all prizes, are provided “as is” without warranty of any kind, either express or implied, including but not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement.

#### Disputes

Except where prohibited, entrant agrees that: (1) any and all disputes, claims, and causes of action arising out of or connected with this Quiz or any prize awarded shall be resolved individually, without resort to any form of class action, and exclusively by a court of competent jurisdiction in the Commonwealth of Virginia; (2) any and all claims, judgment, and awards shall be limited to actual out-of-pocket costs incurred, including costs associated with entering the Sweepstakes, but in no event attorneys’ fees; (3) under no circumstances will entrant be permitted to obtain awards for, and entrant hereby waives all rights to claim, indirect, punitive, incidental, and consequential damages and any other damages, other than for actual out-of-pocket expenses, any and all rights to have damages multiplied or otherwise increased. All issues and questions concerning the construction, validity, interpretation, and enforceability of these Official Rules, or the rights and obligations of the entrant and Sponsor in connection with the Quiz, shall be governed by, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, without giving effect to any choice of law or conflict of laws (whether of the Commonwealth of Virginia or any other jurisdiction), which would cause the application of the laws of any jurisdiction other than the Commonwealth of Virginia.