---
title: Mississippi's Eighth Grade Standards
date: '2009-02-08T20:13:41'
lastmod: '2017-12-01T14:23:42'
type: teaching_standard
draft: false
drupal_nid: 21218
---

## Course: United States History from Exploration through Reconstruction/h2>Content Strand: Domestic Affairs 1. Understand the major events, actors and ideas that precipitated the founding of the nation and relate their significance to the development of American constitutional democracy. + a. Describe the relationship between the moral and political ideas of the Great Awakening, the Enlightenment, and Western Political philosophies and the development of revolutionary sentiment among the colonists. (DOK 2) + b. Analyze the philosophy of government expressed in the Declaration of Independence, with an emphasis on government as a means of protecting individual rights (e.g., phrases such as "all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights"). (DOK 3) + c. Explain major events (The Stamp Act, The Intolerable Acts, Boston Tea Party, First Continental Congress, etc.) that led to the beginning of the American Revolutionary War. (DOK 2) + d. Compare and contrast the major documents and works (e.g., Magna Carta, Declaration of Independence, Articles of Confederation, the United States Constitution, Bill of Rights, the Federalist Papers, etc.) that laid the foundation for American democracy. (DOK 2) + e. Describe and explain the role of the Founding Fathers (e.g., Washington, Adams, Hamilton, Jefferson) and their impact on the development of America‘s political landscape. (DOK 2)- Understand how technology, geography, and social conflict has impacted the development of the United States. + a. Discuss the influence of industrialization and technological developments in the various regions of the U.S., including human changes to the landscape and how the physical geography affected human actions (e.g., growth of cities, deforestation, farming, mineral extraction). (DOK 2) + b. Cite evidence and evaluate the importance of improvements in transportation and communication (e.g., steamboats, railroads, canals, telegraph, etc.) in the development of American society. (DOK 3) + c. Describe the purpose, challenges, and economic incentives associated with westward expansion, including the concept of Manifest Destiny (e.g., the Lewis and Clark expedition, accounts of the removal of Indians, the Cherokees' "Trail of Tears," settlement of the Great Plains) and the territorial acquisitions that spanned numerous decades. (DOK 2) + d. Trace the origins and development of slavery; its effects on African Americans and on the nation‘s political, social, religious, economic, and cultural development; and identify the strategies that were tried to both overturn and preserve it. (DOK 2) + e. Analyze the causes, key events, and consequences of the Civil War. (DOK 3) + f. Evaluate and examine the Reconstruction Era (using primary and secondary sources such as political cartoons, documents, letters, etc.). (DOK 3) Content Strand: Global Affairs- Understand how geography and politics have influenced the historical development of the United States in the global community. + a. Examine the exploration and colonization periods of the United States using social studies tools (e.g., timelines, time zones, maps, globes, graphs, political cartoons, tables, technology, etc.). (DOK 2) + b. Analyze how the American Revolution impacted other nations, (e.g. France, Canada, Spain, Mexico, etc.). (DOK 3) + c. Analyze U.S. foreign policy in the early period prior to reconstruction. (DOK 3) Content Strand: Civil/Human Rights- Understand the impact of American ideals and institutions on the development of American democracy. + a. Analyze how conflict, cooperation, and interdependence (e.g., social justice, diversity, mutual respect, and civic engagement) among groups, societies, and nations influenced the writing of early historical documents. (DOK 3) + b. Study the lives of formerly enslaved African Americans who gained freedom in the North and founded schools and churches to advance their rights and communities. (DOK 2) + c. Examine the women‘s suffrage movement (e.g., biographies, writings, and speeches of Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Margaret Fuller, Lucretia Mott, Susan B. Anthony). (DOK 2) + d. Research and analyze political and social impacts of civil rights movements throughout the history of the United States pre-Reconstruction era (e.g., slave revolts, abolitionist movement, protests over British taxation in the colonies, individual and group resistance, organizing efforts, and collective action/unity). (DOK 3) Content Strand: Economics- Understand the interaction of individuals, families, communities (microeconomics), businesses, and governments (macroeconomics) and the potential costs and benefits to the United States economy. + a. Compare and contrast the economic factors that led to the development of America (e.g., exploration, colonization, immigration, sectionalism, industry in the North vs. agriculture in the South, tariffs, etc.). (DOK 2) + b. Analyze and evaluate the causes and effects of the Industrial Revolution, Westward Expansion, and immigration on the United States (e.g., inventions, railroads, canals, roads, gold rush, etc.). (DOK 3) Content Strand: Culture- Understand the purposes and principles embodied in the ideals and values of American society. + a. Evaluate the value and the challenge of diversity in American life. (DOK 3) + b. Assess the importance of certain character traits in a democracy, such as civility, nationalism, freedom, authority, justice, equality, responsibility, etc. (DOK 3) + c. Examine how American society has been influenced culturally by exploration, immigration, colonization, sectionalism, religious and social movements, etc. (DOK 3)