---
title: What Really Happened? Comparing Stories of the First Thanksgiving
date: '2011-07-11T13:44:51'
lastmod: '2018-09-21T10:55:26'
content_type: lesson_plan_reviews
draft: false
drupal_nid: 25034
url: /teaching-materials/lesson-plan-reviews/25034
flexibility_scale: '4'
topic: Colonial history
website_url: http://learning.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/11/23/what-really-happened-comparing-stories-of-the-first-thanksgiving/
image_fid: '7789'
splash_image_fid: '7790'
summary: Take a variety of perspectives into account before moving past the first
  Thanksgiving.
splash_image: /files/whatreallyhappened432x240.jpg
image: /files/lesson_image/whatreallyhappened113x150.jpg
grade_levels:
- elementary
- high
- middle
duration: One-two class sessions
time_periods:
- Colonization & Settlement, 1585-1763
topics:
- American Indians
- Global Contact
- Ideas & Ideologies
- New England
tags:
- Thanksgiving
- holidays
---

This [lesson](http://learning.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/11/23/what-really-happened-comparing-stories-of-the-first-thanksgiving/) does a good job of positioning students to understand and evaluate the perspectives of secondary sources on the First Thanksgiving. Students begin by establishing a common understanding of the "mainstream narrative" of the First Thanksgiving, either from their own experience, books on Thanksgiving written for young children, or a website like this [one](http://kids.nationalgeographic.com/kids/stories/history/first-thanksgiving/) from [National Geographic Kids](http://kids.nationalgeographic.com/kids/stories/history/). (Other, similar sites are also linked near the bottom of the lesson).

In groups, students then read accounts of the first Thanksgiving from one of four points of view: mainstream accounts, Native American educators and public school leaders, conservative and Tea Party activists, and Native Americans critical of the holiday. Multiple articles are provided for each category so teachers may choose the articles most appropriate for their students. After analyzing each category of sources in small groups, students come together as a class to discuss the various perspectives of the accounts they read. This is an ideal opportunity for teachers to highlight the importance of paying attention to source information and reading historical accounts with a critical eye.

Some modifications may be necessary depending on your students' ages, abilities, and background knowledge. Students may need additional background information on the sources depending on their familiarity with the different point-of-view groups. You may also need to [modify some of the texts](/teaching-materials/teaching-guides/23560) depending on students' reading levels. Also, see the rubric below for more background information and historically accurate information about the first Thanksgiving.

The lesson concludes with a series of discussion questions that do a good job of helping students to think more carefully about the social and political impact of accepted historical narratives. For example, "What's at stake in interpreting the story [of the First Thanksgiving]?" These questions help students start digging into why we remember the past in particular ways and compare stories about the past generated by collective memory with evidence-based accounts of the past.