---
title: 1804 Inventory
date: '2011-10-12T15:11:07'
lastmod: '2018-09-11T13:16:46'
content_type: ex_of_historical_thinking
draft: false
drupal_nid: 25206
url: /best-practices/examples-of-historical-thinking/25206
author_bio: Barbara Clark Smith is Curator of Social History at the Smithsonian’s
  National Museum of American History, where she has worked since 1983.
website_url: http://historymatters.gmu.edu/mse/sia/inventory.htm
splash_image_fid: '8292'
author_image_fid: '8646'
summary: What can an inventory tell you about daily life in Delaware in 1804? Curator
  Barbara Clark Smith asks this document four questions.
splash_image: /files/splash.inventory.jpg
author_image: /files/author_image/barbara_1.jpg
time_periods:
- Expansion & Reform, 1801-1861
- Revolution & New Nation, 1754-1820s
topics:
- African Americans
- Consumer Culture
- Daily Life
- Gender
- Mid-Atlantic
- Slavery
tags:
- Delaware
- inventories
videos:
- src: /files/media/video/csmith1.mp4
  thumb: /files/media/video/thumbs/csmith1.jpg
  title: 'What questions do you bring to reading a document like this?'
- src: /files/media/video/csmith2.mp4
  thumb: /files/media/video/thumbs/csmith2.jpg
  title: 'What do you learn by reading this inventory?'
- src: /files/media/video/csmith3.mp4
  thumb: /files/media/video/thumbs/csmith3.jpg
  title: 'How do you contextualize material objects in an inventory?'
- src: /files/media/video/csmith4.mp4
  thumb: /files/media/video/thumbs/csmith4.jpg
  title: 'Are you curious about anything after reading the inventory?'
---

An inventory—a list of someone's belongings made at his or her death—can tell you something about a person's life. But what does it leave out? Barbara Clark Smith examines an 1804 inventory, asking what it does and does not record.

## Transcript

The first thing I'd want to do is know a good deal more about Thomas Springer. It's really hard to know much about him with only this. So, I'd go track down . . . luckily I can find him in tax lists, find out what he's listed as owning at different moments, how much he paid, find his will. I can find a record of his marriage, and his children's birth in the local church. And I can find the deeds of his sales. So I'd want to find out as much as I can about him. And then I want to find out about other people who live in Mill Creek Hundred, or New Castle County, those other people on the tax lists. What their lives are like, how much land they own, what possessions they have. So that I can tell, is this man typical or is he exceptional in some way? And for that I'd want to then locate the document in the context of other documents, particularly in this region. And compare this inventory with the inventory of other people in Northern Delaware in this time period. Maybe take a 10-year period of time and see, of people who die, and paying attention to how old they are when they die. What do they own? How much is it valued at? So I think, that, first Thomas Springer, find out more about him. And then find out more about the other people around him in his community and what's going on in the region in general.

I think what's interesting; the other final context is the context of change in material culture. And probably what's most interesting there is the house itself. Because it's very easy to have an image of 18th-century houses and early 19th-century houses as being several different rooms, high style, with separate parlors, bedrooms. A central hall in the Georgian style. That's what you see when you go to most historic houses because the ones that have been saved are these very nice houses of well-to-do people. And here's a really ordinary house. It's small. We'd have a hard time being comfortable living in this space. And there's no evidence particularly, that Tom Springer or Elizabeth Springer or their children had a hard time living in this space. And this as it turns out is extremely typical. Most people in the early 19th century are still living in one- or two-room houses made of wood. Not made of brick, not fancy, nothing permanent, nothing meant to last all that long.
